docs: What’s new & Upgrade guide 10.2 (#75909)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/whatsnew/whats-new-in-v10-2.md

You can now map Google groups to Grafana organizational roles when using Google OIDC.
This is useful if you want to limit the access users have to your Grafana instance.

We've also added support for controlling allowed groups when using Google OIDC.

Refer to the [Google Authentication documentation](http://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/setup-grafana/configure-security/configure-authentication/google/) to learn how to use these new options.

### Permission validation on custom role creation and update

<!-- Mihaly Gyongyosi -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise_

With the current release, we enabled RBAC permission validation (`rbac.permission_validation_enabled` setting) by default. This means that the permissions provided in the request during custom role creation or update are validated against the list of [available permissions and their scopes](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/administration/roles-and-permissions/access-control/custom-role-actions-scopes/#action-definitions). If the request contains a permission that is not available or the scope of the permission is not valid, the request is rejected with an error message.

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/panels-visualizations/globalminmax.png" max-width="300px" caption="Stat panel visualization with min/max calculated from all fields" >}}

In this example in the stat visualization, it's hard to get an idea of how the values of each series relate to the historical values of that series. The threshold of 10% is exceeded by the A-series even though the A-series is below 10% of its historical maximum.

Now, you can automatically calculate the min or max of each visualized field based on the lowest and highest value of the individual field. This setting is available in the standard options of most visualizations.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/panels-visualizations/localminmax.png" max-width="300px" caption="Stat panel visualization with min/max calculated per field" >}}
In this example, using the same data, with the min and max calculated for each individual field, we get a much better understanding of how the current value relates to the historical values. The A-series no longer exceeds the 10% threshold; in fact, it's now clear that it's at a historical low.

> # This is not only useful in the stat visualization; gauge, bar gauge, and status history visualizations, table cells formatted by thresholds, and gauge table cells all benefit from this addition.

Author: ```suggestion
This is not only useful in the stat visualization; gauge, bar gauge, and status history visualizations, table cells formatted by thresholds, and gauge table cells all benefit from this addition.
```

-->

## Public dashboards

<!-- Thanos Karachalios -->

_Generally Available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Public dashboards allow you to share your visualizations and insights to a broader audience without the requirement of a login. You can effortlessly use our current sharing model and create a public dashboard URL to share with anyone using the generated public URL link. To learn more, refer to the [Public dashboards documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/dashboards/dashboard-public/), as well as the following video demo:

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards/public-dashboards-demo.mp4" >}}

## Recorded queries: Record multiple metrics from a single query

<!-- Kyle Brandt, Observability Metrics -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise_

With recorded queries, a single recorded query can now record multiple metrics.

## Dashboards and visualizations

### Generative AI features for dashboards

// Is this actually generally available given steps of needing to also install LLM plugin / have openAI key?

> _Generally available in of Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Reviewer 2: This should be public preview status 😬

Author: Yep, I got that from the Slack thread. It's in my local set of updates.

The `accessTokenExpirationCheck` feature toggle will be removed in Grafana v10.3.
{{% /admonition %}}

### Add dashboard and folder permissions to service accounts

<!-- Jo Guerreiro -->

_Generally available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Service accounts allow you to create a token that can be used to authenticate with Grafana.
You can use this token to access Grafana's API, as well as dashboards that the service account has access to.

In this release, we've added the ability to assign dashboard and folder permissions to service accounts.
This means that you can now create a service account that can be used to access a specific dashboard and nothing else.

This is useful if you want to limit the access service accounts have to your Grafana instance.

### Add data source permissions to service accounts

<!-- Jo Guerreiro -->

> _Generally vailable in Grafana Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise_
```

## Feature
<!-- Name of contributor -->
<!-- _[Generally available | Available in private/public preview | Experimental] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise]_
Description. Include an overview of the feature and problem it solves, and where to learn more (like a link to the docs).
{{% admonition type="note" %}}
Use full URLs for links. When linking to versioned docs, replace the version with the version interpolation placeholder (for example, <GRAFANA_VERSION>, <TEMPO_VERSION>, <MIMIR_VERSION>) so the system can determine the correct set of docs to point to. For example, "https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/" becomes "https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/".
{{% /admonition %}}
-->
<!-- Add an image, GIF or video  as below

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards/WidgetVizSplit.png" max-width="750px" caption="DESCRIPTIVE CAPTION" >}}

Learn how to upload images here: https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/image-guidelines/#where-to-store-media-assets
-->

## Share your dashboard with the world: Public dashboards are generally available

<!-- Thanos Karachalios -->

> _Generally Available in all editions of Grafana_

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_
```

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards/public-dashboards-demo.mp4" >}}

## Navigate lengthy, mixed data in Explore with Content Outline

<!-- Thanos Karachalios -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Introducing Content Outline in Grafana Explore. It's easy to lose track of your place when you're running complex mixed queries or switching between logs and traces. Content outline is our first step towards seamless navigation from log lines to traces and back to queries, ensuring quicker searches while preserving context. Experience efficient, contextual investigations with this update in Grafana Explore. To learn more, refer to the [Content outline documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/explore/#content-outline), as well as the following video demo.

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/explore/content-outline-demo.mp4" >}}

## Correlations

> Grafana Correlations is a new Public Preview feature you can use to establish links from any data source query to any other, carrying forward data like namespace, host, or label values. This is extremely powerful for performing root cause analysis with a diverse set of data sources. For more information, refer to [the documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/correlations/).

Author: ```suggestion
Grafana Correlations is a new public preview feature you can use to establish links from any data source query to any other, carrying forward data like namespace, host, or label values. This is extremely powerful for performing root cause analysis with a diverse set of data sources. For more information, refer to [the documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/correlations/).
```

### Create Correlations the easy way in Grafana Explore

<!-- Kristina Durivage -->

> _Available in public preview in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Available in public preview in all editions of Grafana_
```

Creating correlations has just become easier. Try out our new correlations editor in Explore by selecting the **+ Add > Add correlation** option from the top bar or from the command palette. The editor shows all possible places where you can place data links and guides you through building and testing target queries. For more information, refer to [the documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/correlations/).

To try out **Correlations**, enable the `correlations` [feature toggle](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/#preview-feature-toggles).

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/correlations-explore-editor-10-2.png" max-width="300px" caption="Create a Correlation with variables from within Grafana Explore" >}}

### Create correlations for provisioned data sources

<!-- Piotr Jamróz -->

> _Available in public preview in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Available in public preview in all editions of Grafana_
```

In previous versions of Grafana, if a data source was provisioned, the only way to add correlations to it was also with provisioning. Now, that's no longer the case, and you can easily create new correlations mixing both methods—using the **Administration** page or provisioning. For more information, refer to [the documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/correlations/).

To try out **Correlations**, enable the `correlations` [feature toggle](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/#preview-feature-toggles).

## Dashboards and visualizations

### Use AI to generate titles, descriptions, and change summaries

> _Available in public preview in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Available in public preview in all editions of Grafana_
```

- **Generate dashboard save changes summary** - You can now generate a summary of the changes you've made to a dashboard when you save it. This is great for effortlessly tracking the history of a dashboard.

To enable these features, you must first enable the `dashgpt` [feature toggle](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/#experimental-feature-toggles). Then install and configure Grafana's LLM app plugin. For more information, refer to the [Grafana LLM app plugin documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/machine-learning/llm-plugin/).

When enabled look for the "✨ Auto generate" option next to the Title and Description settings in your panels and dashboards, or when you press the "Save" button.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards/auto-generate-description-10-2.gif" max-width="750px" caption="Auto-generate a panel description using AI" >}}

> ### Find your dashboard faster with the new Dashboard Browse screen

Author: ```suggestion
### Find your dashboard faster with the new Dashboards browse screen
```

<!-- Yaelle Chaudy for Frontend Platform -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

> The new Browse screen for dashboards features a more compact design, making it easier to navigate, search for, and manage your folders and dashboards. The new interface also has many performance improvements, especially for instances with a large number of folders and dashboards.

Author: ```suggestion
The new browse screen for dashboards features a more compact design, making it easier to navigate, search for, and manage your folders and dashboards. The new interface also has many performance improvements, especially for instances with a large number of folders and dashboards.
```

To make using folders easier and more consistent, there's no longer a special **General** folder. Dashboards without a folder, or dashboards previously in the **General** folder, are now shown at the root level.

> To try it out, head to the Dashboards section of your Grafana instance.

Author: ```suggestion
To try it out, go to the **Dashboards** section of your Grafana instance.
```

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/2023-09-11-New-Browse-Dashboards-Enablement-Video.mp4" >}}

### Create interactive buttons in the Canvas panel

_Available in public preview in all editions of Grafana_

<!-- Nathan Marrs -->
<!-- Cloud -->

> You can now add buttons to your Canvas visualizations. Buttons can be configured to call an API endpoint. This pushes Grafana's capabilities to new heights, allowing you to create interactive dashboards that can be used to control external systems.

Author: ```suggestion
You can now add buttons to your canvas visualizations. Buttons can be configured to call an API endpoint. This pushes Grafana's capabilities to new heights, allowing you to create interactive dashboards that can be used to control external systems.
```

To learn more, refer to our [Canvas button element documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/panels-visualizations/visualizations/canvas/#button).

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/2023-20-10-Canvas-Button-Element-Enablement-Video.mp4" max-width="750px" caption="Canvas button element demo" >}}

> ### Zoom in on the Y-axis of the Time Series and Candlestick panels

Author: ```suggestion
### Zoom in on the y-axis of the Time series and Candlestick visualizations
```

> _Generally available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_
```

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/grafana/screen-recording-10-2-y-axis-zoom-demo.mp4" max-width="750px" caption="Y-axis zooming demo" >}}

### Calculate visualization min/max individually per field

<!-- Oscar Kilhed -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

When visualizing multiple fields with a wide spread of values, calculating the min or max value of the visualization based on all fields can hide useful details.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/panels-visualizations/globalminmax.png" max-width="300px" caption="Stat panel visualization with min/max calculated from all fields" >}}

In this example in the stat visualization, it's hard to get an idea of how the values of each series relate to the historical values of that series. The threshold of 10% is exceeded by the A-series even though the A-series is below 10% of its historical maximum.

Now, you can automatically calculate the min or max of each visualized field based on the lowest and highest value of the individual field. This setting is available in the standard options of most visualizations.

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/panels-visualizations/localminmax.png" max-width="300px" caption="Stat panel visualization with min/max calculated per field" >}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/panels-visualizations/localminmax.png" max-width="300px" caption="Stat visualization with min/max calculated per field" >}}
```

In this example, using the same data, with the min and max calculated for each individual field, we get a much better understanding of how the current value relates to the historical values. The A-series no longer exceeds the 10% threshold; in fact, it's now clear that it's at a historical low.

This isn't only useful in the stat visualization&mdash;gauge, bar gauge, and status history visualizations, table cells formatted by thresholds, and gauge table cells all benefit from this addition.

### Data visualization quality of life improvements

> _Generally available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_
```

<!-- Nathan Marrs -->
<!-- Cloud -->

We've made a number of smaller improvements to the data visualization experience in Grafana.

#### Geomap marker symbol alignment options

You can now offset Geomap marker symbols from the underlying data point.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/gif-grafana-10-2-geomap-marker-symbol-alignment.gif" max-width="750px" caption="Geomap marker symbol alignment" >}}

#### Gauge visualization overflow support

You can now visualize gauges in vertical and horizontal orientations with overflow. This resolves an issue where the design would break when the number of gauges exceeded the available space.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/gif-grafana-10-2-gauge-overflow.gif" max-width="750px" caption="Gauge overflow" >}}

#### Bar chart axes improvements

You can now center bar chart axes on zero and configure axes border and color settings.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-grafana-10-2-bar-chart-axes-improvements.png" max-width="750px" caption="Bar chart improvements" >}}

## Data sources and querying

### Tempo data source

> We've placed special focus on the Tempo data source over the past couple of months with new features, query performance improvements, and a better query exerience.

Author: ```suggestion
We've placed special focus on the Tempo data source over the past couple of months with new features, query performance improvements, and a better query experience.
```

#### Compute RED metrics over spans aggregated by attribute with the "Aggregate By" Search option

<!-- Joey Tawadrous, Jen Villa -->

> _Experimental in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Experimental in all editions of Grafana_
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/tempo/metrics-summary-10-2.png" caption="Aggregate by" >}}

#### Query traces more easily with the Improved TraceQL editor

<!-- Fabrizio Casati -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

The [TraceQL query editor](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/traceql/#traceql-query-editor) has been improved to facilitate the creation of TraceQL queries. In particular, it now features improved autocompletion, syntax highlighting, and error reporting.

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/tempo/screen-recording-grafana-10.2-traceql-query-editor-improvements.mp4" >}}

#### Group multiple spansets per trace

<!-- Joey Tawadrous -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

The [TraceQL query editor](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/traceql/#traceql-query-editor) has been improved to facilitate the grouping of multiple spans per trace in TraceQL queries. For example, when the `by(resource.service.name)` is added to your TraceQL query, it will group the spans in each trace by `resource.service.name`.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/tempo/multiple-spansets-per-trace-10-2.png" max-width="750px" caption="Multiple spansets per trace" >}}

> #### Create Query-type template variables for the Tempo data source

Author: ```suggestion
#### Create query-type template variables for the Tempo data source
```

<!-- Fabrizio Casati -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

The Tempo data source now supports query-type template variables. With this update, you can create variables for which the values are a list of attribute names or attribute values seen on spans received by Tempo.

To learn more, refer to the following video demo, as well as the [Grafana Variables documentation](/docs/grafana/next/dashboards/variables/).

{{< video-embed src="/media/docs/tempo/screen-recording-grafana-10.2-tempo-query-type-template-variables.mp4" >}}

### SAP HANA®: Configure your data source with tenant database instance name and number

<!-- Miguel Palau -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise and Grafana Cloud Advanced_

> The SAP HANA® data source now supports tenant database connections by using the database name and/or instance number, which are less likely to change than the port for your database. For more information, refer to our [SAP HANA® configuration documentation](/docs/plugins/grafana-saphana-datasource/latest/#configuration).

Author: ```suggestion
The SAP HANA® data source now supports tenant database connections by using the database name and/or instance number. This is helpful because these are less likely to change than the port for your database. For more information, refer to our [SAP HANA® configuration documentation](/docs/plugins/grafana-saphana-datasource/latest/#configuration).
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/transformations/completion.png" caption="Input with dashboard variable suggestions" >}}

### New modes for the Add field from calculation transformation

<!-- Victor Marin -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

The **Add field from calculation** transformation has been updated.

**Unary operation** is a new mode that lets you apply mathematical operations to a field. The currently supported operations are:

- **Absolute value (abs)** - Returns the absolute value of a given expression. It represents its distance from zero as a positive number.
- **Natural exponential (exp)** - Returns _e_ raised to the power of a given expression.
- **Natural logarithm (ln)** - Returns the natural logarithm of a given expression.
- **Floor (floor)** - Returns the largest integer less than or equal to a given expression.
- **Ceiling (ceil)** - Returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to a given expression.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/transformations/unary-operation.png" >}}

> **Row index** can now show the index as a percentage.

Author: ```suggestion
Also, **Row index** can now show the index as a percentage.
```

Learn more in the [Add field from calculation documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/#add-field-from-calculation).

### Format strings with transformations

<!-- Solomon Dubock, BI Squad -->

_Experimental in all editions of Grafana_

With the new **Format string** transformation, you can manipulate string fields to improve how they're displayed. The currently supported operations are:

- **Change case** changes the case of your string to upper case, lower case, sentence case, title case, pascal case, camel case, or snake case.
- **Trim** removes white space characters at the start and end of your string.
- **Substring** selects a part of your string field.

Learn more in the [Format string documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/#format-string).

### See which transformations will work with your data

<!-- Kyle Cunningham -->

> _Available in public preview in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Available in public preview in all editions of Grafana_
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/transformations/format-timezone.png" caption="Timezone support in the Format time transformation" >}}

## Alerting

### Grafana OnCall integration for Alerting

<!-- Brenda Muir -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Use the Grafana Alerting - Grafana OnCall integration to effortlessly connect alerts generated by Grafana Alerting with Grafana OnCall. From there, you can route them according to defined escalation chains and schedules.

To learn more, refer to the [Grafana OnCall integration for Alerting documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/alerting-rules/manage-contact-points/configure-oncall/).

### Export alert rules and notification resources to Terraform

<!-- Yuri Tseretyan -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

This feature provides a way to export Alerting resources such as rules, contact points, and notification policies as Terraform resources. A new "Modify export" mode for alert rules provides a convenient way of editing provisioned alert rules and exporting the modified version.

### Additional contact points for external Alertmanager

<!-- Alexander Weaver -->

> _Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_
```

We've added support for the Microsoft Teams contact points when using an external Alertmanager.

## Authentication and authorization

### No basic role

<!-- Eric Leijonmarck -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise and Grafana Cloud_

We're excited to introduce the "No basic role," a new basic role with no permissions. A basic role in Grafana dictates the set of actions a user or entity can perform, known as permissions. This new role is especially beneficial if you're aiming for tailored, customized RBAC permissions for your service accounts or users. You can set this as a basic role through the API or UI.

Previously, permissions were granted based on predefined sets of capabilities. Now, with the "No basic role," you have the flexibility to be even more granular.

For more details on basic roles and permissions, refer to the [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/roles-and-permissions/).

### New Service Account permissions

> [Service accounts](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/service-accounts/) allow you to create tokens to access Grafana's API and dashboards. Service accounts are a powerful tool for authenticating with Grafana's API and accessing data sources. However, without proper access controls, service accounts can pose a security risk to your Grafana instance. In Grafana 10.2, we've added new tools to limit Service Accounts to just the resources they need to access.

Author: ```suggestion
[Service accounts](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/service-accounts/) allow you to create tokens to access Grafana's API and dashboards. Service accounts are a powerful tool for authenticating with Grafana's API and accessing data sources. However, without proper access controls, service accounts can pose a security risk to your Grafana instance. In Grafana 10.2, we've added new tools to limit service accounts to just the resources they need to access.
```

The `accessTokenExpirationCheck` feature toggle will be removed in Grafana v10.3.
{{% /admonition %}}

### Permission validation on custom role creation and update

<!-- Mihaly Gyongyosi -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise and Grafana Cloud_

With the current release, we enabled RBAC permission validation (`rbac.permission_validation_enabled` setting) by default. This means that the permissions provided in the request during custom role creation or update are validated against the list of [available permissions and their scopes](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/roles-and-permissions/access-control/custom-role-actions-scopes/#action-definitions). If the request contains a permission that is not available or the scope of the permission is not valid, the request is rejected with an error message.

## Recorded queries: Record multiple metrics from a single query

<!-- Kyle Brandt, Observability Metrics -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise_

> Recorded queries provide a way to take a _static_ number, (say, the number of GitHub issues open at a given time, or the number of rows in a database table) and record it periodically as a Prometheus metric. This is great for tracking numbers over time for quick querying later. Previously, Recorded Queries were limited to a single series, so you needed to narrow your query down to a single number in order to record it. Now, you can record multiple metrics with a single recorded query, which makes them more powerful _and_ easier to create and manage.

Author: ```suggestion
Recorded queries provide a way to take a _static_ number, (for example, the number of GitHub issues open at a given time, or the number of rows in a database table) and record it periodically as a Prometheus metric. This is great for tracking numbers over time for quick querying later. Previously, recorded queries were limited to a single series, so you needed to narrow your query down to a single number in order to record it. Now, you can record multiple metrics with a single recorded query, which makes them more powerful _and_ easier to create and manage.
```

### Choose your timezome in the Format time and Convert field type transformations

<!-- Kyle Cunningham -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

We've added support for setting timezones manually when formatting times as strings using the **Format time** and **Convert field type** transformations. This allows times to be formatted relative to any timezone across the globe.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/transformations/format-timezone.png" caption="Timezone support in the Format time transformation" >}}

## Alerting

### Grafana OnCall integration for Alerting

<!-- Brenda Muir -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Use the Grafana Alerting - Grafana OnCall integration to effortlessly connect alerts generated by Grafana Alerting with Grafana OnCall. From there, you can route them according to defined escalation chains and schedules.

To learn more, refer to the [Grafana OnCall integration for Alerting documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/alerting-rules/manage-contact-points/configure-oncall/).

> ### Export alert rules and notification resources to Terraform
> 
> <!-- Yuri Tseretyan -->
> 
> _Generally available in all editions of Grafana_
> 
> This feature provides a way to export alerting resources such as rules, contact points, and notification policies as Terraform resources. A new "Modify export" mode for alert rules provides a convenient way of editing provisioned alert rules and exporting the modified version.

Author: ```suggestion
### Export alerting resources to Terraform

<!-- Yuri Tseretyan -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Export your alerting resources, such as alert rules, contact points, and notification policies as Terraform resources. A new “Modify export” mode for alert rules enables you to edit provisioned alert rules and export a modified version. 
```

### Additional contact points for external Alertmanager

<!-- Alexander Weaver -->

_Generally available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

We've added support for the Microsoft Teams contact points when using an external Alertmanager.

> ### Edit file-provisioned and Terraform-provisioned alerting resources
> 
> <!-- George Robinson -->
> 
> _Generally available in all editions of Grafana_
> 
> Edit provisioned alerting resources using file provisioning or Terraform directly from within the Grafana UI.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

<!-- Kyle Cunningham -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

We've added support for setting timezones manually when formatting times as strings using the **Format time** and **Convert field type** transformations. This allows times to be formatted relative to any timezone across the globe.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/transformations/format-timezone.png" caption="Timezone support in the Format time transformation" >}}

## Alerting

### Grafana OnCall integration for Alerting

<!-- Brenda Muir -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Use the Grafana Alerting - Grafana OnCall integration to effortlessly connect alerts generated by Grafana Alerting with Grafana OnCall. From there, you can route them according to defined escalation chains and schedules.

To learn more, refer to the [Grafana OnCall integration for Alerting documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/alerting-rules/manage-contact-points/configure-oncall/).

### Export alert rules and notification resources to Terraform

<!-- Yuri Tseretyan -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

> This feature provides a way to export Alerting resources such as rules, contact points, and notification policies as Terraform resources. A new "Modify export" mode for alert rules provides a convenient way of editing provisioned alert rules and exporting the modified version.

Author: ```suggestion
This feature provides a way to export alerting resources such as rules, contact points, and notification policies as Terraform resources. A new "Modify export" mode for alert rules provides a convenient way of editing provisioned alert rules and exporting the modified version.
```

### Additional contact points for external Alertmanager

<!-- Alexander Weaver -->

_Generally available in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

We've added support for the Microsoft Teams contact points when using an external Alertmanager.

### Edit file-provisioned and Terraform-provisioned alerting resources

<!-- George Robinson -->

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana_

Edit provisioned alerting resources using file provisioning or Terraform directly from within the Grafana UI.

> ### Recovery thresholds for alerts
> 
> <!-- George Robinson -->
> 
> _Generally available in all editions of Grafana_
> 
> To reduce the noise of flapping alerts, you can set a recovery threshold different from the alert threshold.
> 
> Flapping alerts occur when a metric hovers around the alert threshold condition and they may lead to frequent state changes, resulting in too many notifications being generated.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

The `accessTokenExpirationCheck` feature toggle will be removed in Grafana v10.3.
{{% /admonition %}}

### Permission validation on custom role creation and update

<!-- Mihaly Gyongyosi -->

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise and Grafana Cloud_

With the current release, we enabled RBAC permission validation (`rbac.permission_validation_enabled` setting) by default. This means that the permissions provided in the request during custom role creation or update are validated against the list of [available permissions and their scopes](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/administration/roles-and-permissions/access-control/custom-role-actions-scopes/#action-definitions). If the request contains a permission that is not available or the scope of the permission is not valid, the request is rejected with an error message.

## Recorded queries: Record multiple metrics from a single query

<!-- Kyle Brandt, Observability Metrics -->

> _Generally available in Grafana Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise and Grafana Cloud_
```

<!-- Template below

> Add on-prem only features here. Features documented in the Cloud What's new will be copied from those release notes.

## Feature
<!-- Name of contributor -->
<!-- _[Generally available | Available in private/public preview | Experimental] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise]_
Description. Include an overview of the feature and problem it solves, and where to learn more (like a link to the docs).
{{% admonition type="note" %}}
You must use relative references when linking to docs within the Grafana repo. Please do not use absolute URLs. For more information about relrefs, refer to [Links and references](/docs/writers-toolkit/writing-guide/references/).
{{% /admonition %}}
-->
<!-- Add an image, GIF or video  as below

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards/WidgetVizSplit.png" max-width="750px" caption="DESCRIPTIVE CAPTION" >}}

Learn how to upload images here: https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/image-guidelines/#where-to-store-media-assets
-->

## Authentication and authorization

### No Basic Role
Generally available in all editions of Grafana

> Introducing a new basic role with no permissions, called "No Basic Role." This role is perfect for when users would like their service accounts or users to have tailored customized RBAC permissions. This can be set as a basic role via the API or UI.

Reviewer 3: @eleijonmarck couple of thoughts:

- I think readers would benefit from having references to some of the definitions, such as what is a basic role and a permission. 
- If the feature is GA, there should not be a feature toggle. Can you please check and either remove the toggle, or update to the correct availability note?
- For the what's new content, might be useful to have a note around what was previously and what users have now. 
- I'd remove the note about what is important to remember, and link to the respective docs instead. 

Also, would appreciate if you can send a new PR with the changes, instead of changing directly here. Thank you!

<!-- Template below

> Add on-prem only features here. Features documented in the Cloud What's new will be copied from those release notes.

## Feature
<!-- Name of contributor -->
<!-- _[Generally available | Available in private/public preview | Experimental] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise]_
Description. Include an overview of the feature and problem it solves, and where to learn more (like a link to the docs).
{{% admonition type="note" %}}
You must use relative references when linking to docs within the Grafana repo. Please do not use absolute URLs. For more information about relrefs, refer to [Links and references](/docs/writers-toolkit/writing-guide/references/).
{{% /admonition %}}
-->
<!-- Add an image, GIF or video  as below

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards/WidgetVizSplit.png" max-width="750px" caption="DESCRIPTIVE CAPTION" >}}

Learn how to upload images here: https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/image-guidelines/#where-to-store-media-assets
-->

## Authentication and authorization

### Configure refresh token handling separately for OAuth providers

<!-- Mihaly Gyongyosi -->

> _Available in public preview in all Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_

Author: ```suggestion
_Available in public preview in Grafana Open Source and Enterprise_
```
